= Laminate

Laminate is a system for executing user-written templates built using the Lua languge. Templates written in Lua can be 
executed securely to generate HTML. For end-users, Laminate offers a simple, convenient, yet powerful template
language. For applications, Laminate makes it easy to safely expose data and functions to be executed by user templates.

Laminate is designed to run as part of a Rails application, but can be used by any Ruby program.

Laminate templates work much like ERb templates - they contain normal HTML which is marked up with dynamic
content written in the Lua language.
 

== Template Example

Here is a simple template that displays the value of the "video_count" variable passed to the template.

  <h2>Your collection contains {{video_count}} videos</h2>

== More complex example
Iterate over an array of tags:

  {{for i,tag in ipairs(tags) do}}
	  <a href="/tag/{{tag.name}}">{{tag.name}}</a>
  {{end}}

== Usage Example

  template = Laminate::Template.new(:text => "Your favorite color is: {{color}}")

  template.render(:locals => {:color => 'red'})    => "Your favorite color is: red"

To use in your Rails app, just use:

  render :text => template.render(...)

== Passing data to the template

Literal Ruby values will be automatically converted into Lua. Strings, Booleans, Numbers and nil
will be converted to Lua equivalents. There is currently no conversion for Time or Date, so its
suggested to use time.to_f instead.

Along with literals, Ruby Hashes and Arrays will be converted to Lua tables. This conversion is
recursive, so its easy to pass nested data structures into Lua.

Here is an example:

  > template = Laminate::Template.new(:text => "a deep item is: {{ video.tags[2].name }}")
  > puts template.render(:locals => 
     {:video => {:tags => [{:name => 'tag1', :url => '/tag/tag1'}, {:name => 'tag2', :url => '...'}]}})
  a deep item is: tag2
  
Note how Lua arrays are base-1 indexed instead of base-0.

== Binding functions into the template

Ruby functions can be easily bound into the Lua environment. Arguments to the function will be
automatically converted from Lua, and results will be converted from Ruby according to the same rules
stated above.

You can provide methods to bind by passing an array as the :helpers option to the #render method.
Each element of the :helpers array should be either a Ruby Module or an object. All public methods
of the Module or object will be bound into the Lua environment.

Here is a small example:
  module HelperFuncs
    def md5(cleartext)
      MD5::md5(cleartext).to_s
    end
  end
  
  template = Laminate::Template.new(:text => "I've got your hash here: {{ md5('secret') }}")
  template.render(:helpers => [HelperFuncs])

=== Binding functions into a namespace

Laminate supports a simple form for using namespaces in Lua. This can give you a slightly richer
syntax like:
    your hash is {{ util.md5('secret') }} and your salt is {{ salt() }}
    
Use the following idiom for namespace'd functions:

  class MyHelper < Laminate::AbstractLuaHelper
    namespace :util
    
    def util_md5(cleartext)
      MD5::md5(cleartext).to_s
    end
    
    def salt
      rand.to_s
    end
  end
 
Use ':namespace' to define one or more namespaces. Functions are matched to those namespaces by using the
namespace as prefix for the method name. Methods not using the prefix will be bound at the global level.
       
== Error handling

By default, errors that occur when processing a template are printed into the template output (PHP style).
This is good in an interactive development mode.

In production mode, you probably want to catch errors yourself. To do so, simple pass :raise_errors => true
into the #render method of #Template, or simply call #render!. In this case errors will throw a 
#TemplateError exception. Note that template compilation is delayed until you call #render, so compile errors
can be caught in the same place.  

== Security

Laminate templates are executed by the Lua runtime embedded in the Ruby runtime. The Lua runtime is configured
to remove any insecure functions. In particular, only these standard Lua libraries are loaded:

  base, string, math, table
  
Insecure methods from the base package (like 'loadstring') are also removed. The Lua environment therefore
has no file system access, nor any OS function access.

=== Timeouts

To prevent infinite loops, a SIGALRM timer can be set by Laminate around the running of a template. Use
:timeout => (secs) in your call to #render to place a maximum execution time for the template.

=== Memory usage

Currently there is no special handling to prevent the template from using too much memory. However, the
'string:rep' function is removed from Lua, and the use of a short timeout should prevent most trouble.
  

Requirements
============

Laminate is built on the fantastic Ruby-Lua binding "rufus-lua" from John Mettaux. Rufus-lua requires
both the Lua dynamic library and the Ruby FFI gem.

Installation
============

sudo gem install ffi
sudo gem install rufus-lua
sudo gem install laminate



== LICENSE:

(The MIT License)

Copyright (c) 2009 Scott Persinger.

Permission is hereby granted, free of charge, to any person obtaining
a copy of this software and associated documentation files (the
'Software'), to deal in the Software without restriction, including
without limitation the rights to use, copy, modify, merge, publish,
distribute, sublicense, and/or sell copies of the Software, and to
permit persons to whom the Software is furnished to do so, subject to
the following conditions:

The above copyright notice and this permission notice shall be
included in all copies or substantial portions of the Software.

THE SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED 'AS IS', WITHOUT WARRANTY OF ANY KIND,
EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO THE WARRANTIES OF
MERCHANTABILITY, FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE AND NONINFRINGEMENT.
IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHORS OR COPYRIGHT HOLDERS BE LIABLE FOR ANY
CLAIM, DAMAGES OR OTHER LIABILITY, WHETHER IN AN ACTION OF CONTRACT,
TORT OR OTHERWISE, ARISING FROM, OUT OF OR IN CONNECTION WITH THE
SOFTWARE OR THE USE OR OTHER DEALINGS IN THE SOFTWARE.

